---
layout: post
title: An Ashen Inheritance
subtitle: 
tags: [short story]
show-avatar: false
comments: false
social-share: true
---

There was a row of houses among which sat a great house atop a high hill, flanked by small houses, medium houses, and a few other similarly “great” houses. This great house was an old house and was by and large considered by many to be among the better houses (relatively speaking). Nevertheless, it was not without its blemishes: in some of its support beams, there were termites; in some of its closets, there lingered ghosts; in a few of its cellars, rats; and a couple of its many bathrooms cultivated mold like Petri dishes, albeit with a sink and shower. I’d be remiss to not also mention the time a heavy rain caved the roof of one of its sections and ruined the furnishings and permanently waterlogged the floorboards. As such, we can uncontroversially say that it was a *great* and *imperfect* house.

The resident of this house had inherited it, like most others, and he generally saw to it that it was somewhat kept, but was loath to ever do too much, or at least, any more than what was immediately required. For all intents and purposes, it was *his* house, but he didn’t feel that way—he’d added nothing to the original structure, he hadn’t arranged for new rooms or new designs, he hadn’t done anything quite so avant-garde or altogether impressive. In fact, all of his work was incremental in his view and so a certain paralyzing indifference and nihilism came easily to him. As a rather shortsighted man (he wore glasses for his condition), he viewed life through a narrow lens of days, not years, and so influenced were his views and perceptions of progress. This isn’t to say that he believed all he did to be totally useless; no no, it was only from a particularly apathetic perspective, that to him, the home took much of the benefits of his labor and left little for him in the way of enjoyment and time for leisure.

Further, he suspected, given that he’d inherited this great house, that some of his neighbors secretly thought him spoiled. Adding to his wariness was that the house’s history and size dwarfed him; he was always known as “that fellow that lives in that home” rather than “that fellow that owns that home”. You could say that the house owned him more than he did it—and not literally but figuratively. As we know, since they are objects, houses can’t own a person in any sense of the word. In fact, no concept or thing can ever own an individual so as to be greater than the latter, we are so sure of this that phrases like “he was a slave to the money” or the old lie, “*dulce et decorum est pro patria mori*”, are all *obviously* said tongue in cheek. Obviously.

One day, when his general dissatisfaction was too much to bear, he slammed one of the home’s many doors in frustration. Having been abruptly slammed shut, the door rattled and the hinges trembled and the doorknob fell off, comically slow in comparison to the overall suddenness. Had he any perspective, he would’ve found this a funny, mild inconvenience, and more importantly, trivially repaired. (Whose preventive was even more trivial and obvious, i.e. no more door slamming.) But alas, for this apathetic man, this pushed him over the edge: “surely other homes don’t have doorknobs that fall off”, “surely other homes are made of a sturdier and better stuff” he thought to himself. It is often called a fallacy, but in this line of thinking, this man was indeed tumbling down a rather slippery slope, as sloped as the hill upon which this great house sat. He began to hate his home. And not with that burning visible hate, at least not just yet. For now, it was that hidden, contemptuous hate, a hate where upon seeing something broken you don’t bother to fix it because your mind says it’s just as good broken as it is fixed.

After this event, which we should be clear, was accompanied in quick succession by several other disappointments of varying consequence, the resident flipped completely. He began to *actively* pick apart his own home. To the glee or pity of onlookers—some of his few envious or fewer reasonable neighbors—he would destroy the banisters, he would peel the paint, he would forgo any and all necessary repairs, he would dent the gutters and shatter windows with the rocks he’d throw, he’d deride his home to anyone that’d listen. As was mentioned, some things he did to “show off”, for there was a certain energy from the gathering crowd that he fed off of. In doing all this, he at least felt more than his home. Through destructive action after destructive action, he grew steadily superior and his home steadily inferior (relatively speaking)—his labor no longer appeared incremental but extraordinary…revolutionary even. Some things he claimed were justified measures against the termites or the rats, and in his defense, it is true that as the cellars and attics and closets were pillaged, the rats and their cousins dispersed.

Let us be clear and not mince words. He would do all this from a perverse combination of disgust, real and legitimate grievances, and some base pleasure as many, perhaps all, folks do of tearing things apart. He was now, in addition to being shortsighted, a rather destructive man. None would stop him, some had tried to reason with him, but you cannot tell a man how to use (or squander) his own heritage—who has such authority?

He would tear down and tear down and tear down his home until he became himself worse than any termite infestation. No one at the time, not even he, only we, meaning you and I dear reader, can understand the full picture and see where these train tracks lead. (Several of the supports he removed were never replaced, the paint he’d peeled never repainted, et cetera, et cetera.) Finally to an end, the home was in near total disrepair, and his scorn and disdain for the home was easily apparent. He’d sucked dry from the home (and himself) any ounce of pride or gratitude for what he possessed. He continued to labor in upkeep but to a new disastrously low minimum, only that which was strictly necessary to guarantee himself a cot to lay at night, but as seeing that he was the most energetic and impassioned he’d ever been he didn’t need sleep very much and so was less diligent about even this work.

It all came to a head when one night things were taken too far. The slope was slippery, but the slope has a bottom, and he was at rock bottom, or very near it. As an evolution of the orgiastic disassemblies of his home, he’d started a bonfire in the front yard with pieces of his home and invited whoever wanted to attend, the fence gate was left open. As an audience, they would together take pieces, all of which incidentally turned out to be inconsequential (otherwise the house would’ve toppled over then and there) and hurl them into the fire. Note, dear reader, that the passions of man are like a fire—it can spread like fire, it is immaterial like fire, it can be directed towards destruction or production like fire, it can be snuffed when starved of its fuel or incentive like fire, it is unpredictable and fickle in the presence of changing moods, winds and trends, and like fire, easily agitated and greedy.

It was a breezy night, and so the wind coaxed the fire and it grew and grew. All were generally mindful and aware of the inherent danger the burning of the effigy posed, but there was in this danger a beauty in the way the flames danced and it embodied so well the bright and hotly burning zeal that totally seized the crowd. So thorough was the hypnosis that there was no objection from any of the onlookers and certainly none from the participants.

In case you’ve forgotten dear reader that fire is fickle and winds ever-changing, let me now say that a sudden strong gust of wind took the flame and pressed it like a big thumb against the whole house. It was not too long until the entire building was ablaze and gradually devoured by the greedy fire. His neighbors all ran to their homes, none were firefighters. All had inherited their homes, albeit at different times and with differing degrees of commitment, and only some knew how to make additions or build things anew, and at this moment, all anyone cared about was their own home and that the wind not carry those greedy, lice-like embers towards it. Atop this great hill burned this great house, now a literal lighthouse akin to the sort that serve as warning of the impending rock faces that shred mighty ships.

Against the backdrop of a blistering cold night, the warmth from the burning of his home was a good and pleasurable feeling. A warmth that came at great cost, the despoiling of his own inheritance. Doubly tragic because that same home had both a fireplace and plenty of firewood and a functional chimney. Even this man, as shortsighted as he was, flames flickering in the lens of his glasses, could see that the building, as great as it was, could only continue burning for so much longer. Soon the last ember would die out, and he’d be left by himself. Alone and shivering in the cold.